networking

an ip address(internet protocol address)

2 marks questions ---file permission questions

adduser and useradd----
in add user we fill the details in terminal
in useradd --- we have to write the details in -c 





    Managing Users, Groups & Permissions. 

Scenario: As a Linux System Administrator, you are responsible for creating user accounts, managing groups, and modifying permissions according to company requirements. 

  

Your company has tasked you with creating 3 new user accounts for the new hires. You have also been asked to create 3 groups for the new departments that have been established. And finally, in order to adhere to data privacy and compliance regulations, you need to ensure that the right permissions are put in place. 

  

  

Objective 

 

In this article I will be showing you how to create user accounts, groups, directories, and files, as well as how to properly set up and assign permissions in a Linux Server environment. 

  

  

SECTION 1: Creating Directories and Files 

  

Step 1 

The very first step will be to connect to your Linux (Ubuntu) Instance via the Terminal. You can use any terminal of your choice. 

  

Step 2 

Now that you’re logged into the instance, and you have the Linux server up and running, the next thing to do is to log in to the 

server’s root directory. To do this, type in the following command: 

  

  

cd / 

 

This should be the result on your terminal. 

  

  

  

  

  

 

 

 


 

  

  

Step 3 

In this step, I would like to introduce you to the “sudo” command. 

  

The sudo command in Linux stands for “Super User DO”. It allows a user to have temporary administrative privileges in order to perform certain tasks. 

  

We will be using this command quite frequently during this exercise. 

  

Step 4 

 

Now we will be making 3 directories (folders). Folders are referred to as directories in a Linux environment. 

  

To make directories we will be using the “mkdir” command. I will name my directories Development, Operations, and Analytics. You can also use these names for your directories, or you can choose different names. 

  

  

sudo mkdir Development Operations Analytics 

  

  

  

Now if you run the “ls” command, you should see your directories are successfully created. 

  

  

  

 

 

 


 

  

  

Step 5 

 

Next, we will create 3 files for each directory. You can create files in any format of your choice, such as .txt, .docx, .csv, .xls and so on. 

  

Note: File names are case sensitive, meaning “dev.txt” is different from “Dev.txt” 

  

To create files, we can make use of the “touch” command. 

  

  

  

Don’t forget to use the “sudo” command as well, you will get a “Permission denied” error otherwise. 

  

Starting with the Development directory, type in the following commands. 

  

  

cd Development/ 

  

sudo touch myDevFile.txt devfile.docx devSheet.csv 

 

Now if you run the “ls” command, you should see your files are successfully created. 

  

  

  

 

 

 


 

  

  

We’ll do the same for the Operations Directory. 

  

  

  

cd ../Operations/ 

  

sudo touch OpsSheet.csv Opsfile.docx myOpsFile.txt 

  

  

  

  

 

 

 


 

  

  

And finally for the Analytics Directory 

  

  

  

  

  

 

 

 


 

 

SECTION 2: Creating & Managing Groups 

In this section we will be creating new groups, assigning 

  

directories to the groups, and assigning permissions to the groups. 

  

Step 1 

We can create groups using the command “groupadd”. I will name my groups Developers, Operations, and Data Analysts. Again, you can name your groups as you wish. 

  

  

sudo groupadd Developers 

  

  

  

sudo groupadd Operations 

  

  

  

sudo groupadd Data_Analysts 

  

  

Step 2 

Next, I will assign the directories we created earlier to the new groups. One group per directory. 

 

To do this, I can use the “chown” command. The “chown” command allows you to change the group owner of a file or directory. 

  

If we run the ll command on the server’s root directory, we will notice that the current group owner of our directories is the root user. 

  

  

  

 

 

 


 

  

  

The yellow characters in the picture above indicate the current group owner of the directories. 

  

Type in this command format to change the group owner of your directories. 

 

chown :GroupName DirectoryName sudo chown :Developers Development/ sudo chown :Operations Operations/ 

sudo chown :Data_Analysts Analytics/ 

  

  

  

Now, if we run the ll command, 

  

  

  

  

  

 

 

 


 

  

  

We have successfully updated the group owners of the directories. 

  

Step 3 

In this step we will be adding permissions for the directories to the groups according to company requirements. 

 

Regarding permissions, there are 3 permissions that can be assigned. 

  

r (read permissions) 

  

w (write permissions) 

  

x (execute permissions) 

  

  

  

These permissions can be assigned to the following. 

  

  

  

u (user owner) 

  

g (group owner) 

  

o (others) 

  

a (all) 

  

  

  

Company Requirements: Assign only read and execute permissions to the groups. 

 

We can assign permissions for the directories to the groups using the “chmod” command. 

  

  

sudo chmod g+rx Development/ 

  

  

  

sudo chmod g+rx Operations/ 

  

  

  

sudo chmod g+rx Analytics/ 

  

  

  

  

 

 

 


 

  

  

SECTION 3: Creating and Managing User Accounts 

In this section, we will be creating new user accounts and assigning them to their respective groups according to company requirements. 

 

Company Requirements: Create the following users and assign them to their respective groups. 

  

Jess Waller, username= jwaller, email=jwaller@levelupbank.com, group= Developers 

  

Blake Dorsey, username= bdorsey, email=bdorsey@levelupbank.com, group= Operations 

  

Joey Ewart, username= jewart, email=jewart@levelupbank.com, group= Data Analysts 

  

To create user accounts, we will use the command “useradd”. 

  

  

  

We will also make use of a few options when creating our users. 

 

-c option is used to add text string. It is generally a short description of the login, and can be used for the user’s full name, email address, contact number etc. 

-G is used to assign the user to the specified group 

  

-m is used to create the user’s home directory if it does not exist. 

  

  

sudo useradd username -c "Comments" -G groupname -m 

  

sudo useradd jwaller -c "Jess Waller, email=jwaller@levelupbank.com" 

-G Developers -m 

  

sudo useradd bdorsey -c "Blake Dorsey, email=bdorsey@levelupbank.com" -G Operations -m 

sudo useradd jewart -c "Joey Ewart, email=jewart@levelupbank.com" -G Data_Analysts -m 

  

  

To confirm our user accounts were added to their respective groups, we can run the following command. 

  

  

groups username 

 

 


 

  

In the picture above, we can see that the user account for Jess Waller (jwaller) has been created and added to the Developers 

group, Blake Dorsey (bdorsey) has been created and added to the Operations group, and Joey Ewart (jewart) has been created and added to the Data Analysts group. 

  

Success!!! 

  

  

SECTION 4: Switching Users & Verifying Permissions 

In this section, we will be switching to each of our newly created user accounts and verify that they are only able to see the 

directories associated with their group. 

 

Company Requirements: Users should only be able to see the directories associated with their group. 

  

Step 1 

In order to ensure that users outside a group cannot access the 

  

directories and files associated with that particular group, we will need to remove the permissions. 

  

To remove the permissions for other users from the directories we created earlier, run the commands below. 

  

  

sudo chmod o=- Development/ 

  

  

  

sudo chmod o=- Operations/ 

  

  

  

sudo chmod o=- Analytics/ 

  

  

  

The permissions are now updated. 

 

 


 

  

  

Step 2 

Now, before we can switch users, we need to set passwords for the user accounts. To do this, we can use the “passwd” command. 

  

Type in the command below. 

  

  

  

sudo passwd username 

  

  

  

Then type in the password for the user account. 

 

 


 

  

  

Passwords have been set successfully. 

  

  

Step 3 

Now on to switching users. 

  

  

  

To switch users, we use the “su” command, which simply means “switch user”. 

  

  

su - username 

  

  

  

Type in the password for the user account, press enter, and then type in “bash”. Now you’ve successfully logged in as the new user. 

 

 


 

  

  

Step 4 

This step is all about verifying permissions for users. 

  

  

  

For User Account: jwaller 

  

  

  

The picture below shows that the user “jwaller” is able to access the Development directory because she is in the Developers group, but she is not able to access the Analytics or the 

Operations directory because she is not in the appropriate groups. 

 

 


 

  

  

For User Account: bdorsey 

  

  

  

The picture below shows that the user “bdorsey” is able to 

  

access the Operations directory because he is in the Operations group, but he is not able to access the Analytics or the Development directory because he is not in the appropriate groups. 

 

 


 

  

  

For User Account: jewart 

  

  

  

The picture below shows that the user “jewart” is able to access the Analytics directory because he is in the Data Analysts group, but he is not able to access the Development or the Operations directory because he is not in the appropriate groups. 

 

 


 

  

  

This brings us to the end of the project. 

  

  

  

You have successfully completed all the tasks assigned to you by the company. You met all of the company’s requirements and adhered to data privacy and compliance regulations. 