UNIX ---
ALL THE MAC OS THEY ARE UNIX BASED...
unix is foundation of linuxo

LINUX-- 
OPEN SOURCE AND COMUNITY SUPPORT-- IT IS FREE... PROVIDE SECURITY---
ALL THE MAC OS ,,
there are two types of interfaces--
command line and graphical interfaces--


CLI AND GUI---

ls -- it will list the content of directory
when we use / command is ls-- then it will give all 
the children of roots
c

/ is basically root node


cd..  --using this we can do back from a folder...
using this cd.. we can do back to one level up...


pwd-- print working directory ---
this will print the absolute path of the directory
	
	

touch --- this will create new file
touch 2.txt --- this will create a file 1.txt



mkdir--- create a new directory

cp---copy the file
mv-- move the file



if we want to delete an empty folder---- rmd


if we want to create an folder(directory) --- mkdir--
mkdir directory1

touch 2.txt ---- this will create a new file---
echo >"Hello world" >2.txt ---- this will write content in the file


cp file_location_from file_location_to ---- this will copy the file from one directory to second directory----
cp sparsh/2.txt sparsh2/  ---- this will copy the file from one directory to another directory...

mv dir1 dir2 --- this will move the file from one directory to another ...




mv 1.txt sparsh2/  -----this will move 1.txt to sparsh2....
cp 2.txt sparsh2/ --- this will copy 2.txt to sparsh2 ---



ls-a ---- this will even show the hidden files

history--- this will show the history

rmdir --- remove an empty file

CTRL + ALT + T --- OPEN TERMINAL IN UBUNTU SHORTCUT

CTRL + D --- CLOSE THE TERMINAL

KERNAL --- IT IS A SYSTEM OR SOFTWARE THAT ESTABLISH CONNECTION
BETWEEN SOFTWARE AND HARDWARE


cd / ----- this will make the terminal go to move
cd / -------- this will log out to bin
cd /bin --- this will open the bin

the bin is a compiled file that contains the compiled sources code 

this is also know as executable because it is executed on computer

/bin is a sub-directory of the root directory in unix
bin --- has basic executable files like the files which are executable----
like ls , and these types of commands .--- that are present in the linux



ls root ke andar konsi directory ke andar hai ---



/sbin-- this contains system binary / super binary files 




3. Basic Linux Commands
Command	Description
pwd	Print working directory.
ls	List directory contents.
cd	Change directory.
mkdir	Create directories.
rmdir	Remove empty directories.
rm	Remove files or directories.
cp	Copy files and directories.
mv	Move/rename files or directories.
touch	Create an empty file.
cat	Display file contents.
echo	Print text or variables.
man	Display manual for a command.
sudo	Run a command with superuser privileges.
exit	Logout from the current session.






2. Linux File System Hierarchy
/: Root directory.
/bin: Essential binaries (e.g., ls, mkdir).
/sbin: System binaries (e.g., reboot, ifconfig).
/etc: Configuration files (e.g., network settings).
/home: User home directories.
/var: Variable files (e.g., logs).
/usr: User applications.
/tmp: Temporary files.




bin is inside the root --

history --- it will simply tell about all the commands which are used

sudo mkdir sparsh --- this will create a directory named sparsh-
if the directory is created in the root then it need sudo--
sudo -- giving it permission--
else it does not need sudo---


rmdir sparsh --- this will remove the directory sparsh--if 
it is not empty--
and if the sparsh directory is created in the root--
then we can do it with --sudo rmdir sparsh--

cd / this will make the terminal move to root directory




1. File and Directory Management
Command	Description
pwd	Print current working directory.
ls	List files and directories.
cd	Change directory.
mkdir	Create directories.
rmdir	Remove empty directories.
rm	Remove files or directories.
cp	Copy files or directories.
mv	Move/rename files or directories.
touch	Create empty files or update file timestamps.
find	Search for files and directories.
locate	Quickly search for files (requires mlocate package).
tree	Display directory structure in tree format.
